Cooperative Federalism: is when th3e states and govt work together in order to solve problems. Things like Medicaid, where N works with SL govts to solve a problem (i.e. healthcare for the not wealthy). In that example Medicaid is also funded by both state and national governments,

This is also called marble cake federalism because the cake is a brick of everything put into one.

Currently, coop federalism is what usually normally takes place, along fiscal federalism.

Fiscal Federalism is when the N government sees a national problem across states it steps in and finds a way to help. This is when the government gives spending items or help in general to help run different programs as it sees fit (with goals in mind). The way this has been executed has been changed:


We use it way more now (grants, etc. have all gone up). In 1902 there were only a few funded by the feds; in 1920-1930 there was the Great Depression in a massive uptick in grants; in the 1960s there was segregation and whatnot, and thus, as time has gone on we have needed more grants. In the 2000s we had another recession and there were a fuck ton of grants then.
Recession = a lot of grants where the feds are helping the states out in times of need. Economic issues are causing grants (acc. To what someone said in class)

Grants are where the feds give a state money for meeting certain goals OR withholding money if you fail to meet a goal. In the 1900s, there were mostly categorical grants (do WXYZ to get this money). In the 60s and 70s we wanted to give some power back to states but still want a strong national government. Therefore, the block grant became commonplace, which are the same but the goals are more broadly defined. (i.e. “make sure they pass the WXYZ test” vs “just let them graduate high school”).

Federal mandates are must-do (strict) conditions to receive funding for something. It works like a grant but is much more strict and whatnot. For example, states don’t get as much funding if they don’t mandate masks/vaccines/COVID protocols.

Devolution Things such as the Big Deal and whatnot were too big, according to some officials. Sure it was cool but it was a lot of money spent and inefficient (especially to R.Reagan [Republican]). As a Republican they like having a smaller central government, which makes RR in line with his party.

New Federalism is what they came up with to give states more power. This gives states more options as to what they can do with their money and how to receive it.

This also brought about Unfunded Mandates: mandates that say “SL govts must fund this by themselves”. OR “lol good luck you’re own your own”

Now, this didn’t work entirely: the states cannot have all the power. If it goes too far it:
Deunifies the nation
Creates a massive hole that must be filled (withdrawl)
Creates a situation where states are left out to die alone.

An example of this is:
No Child Left Behind: a nationwide standard of education.
Race to the Top: the new standard for education. 
Common Core and whatever the hell they want us to do nowadays

Both these standards are federal mandates, and RTTT is newer. 
